===== PDF PAGE 20 =====
Agricultural Census 20 24 | Integrated Digital Count
6. SCOPE OF THE CENSUS
The scope of the Agricultural Census 2024 as finally approved includes all the topics
concerned with some restrictions mentioned as follows.
The Agricultural Census 2024 only focused on agricultural households involved in operating
agricultural land, rearing livestock, and having agricultural machinery. The selection of
Households to be interviewed was made on the basis of their involvement in agricultural
activities segregating them after listing operation.
The scope refers to the range / subjects / items covered by the Agricultural Census 2024. For
Agricultural Census 2024, the scope with reference to farm area was restricted to the
Agricultural farm(s) / holding(s) held and or operated by the Government or by private
household(s), individually or collectively or under joint arrangement at the time of census
enumeration. Consequently, undistributed government lands other than government farms,
undistributed portions of the land resumed by the Government under land reforms, built up
areas, land under roads, rails, ravines, rivers, canals, government forests, parks, lakes, water
bodies, shallow lands, hills and mountains, etc. falling under the category of non-farm areas
were outside the scope of the census.
It included the collection of data on type, size, tenure and parcels of farms, land utilization,
irrigation, area under crops and orchards, number of fruit and non-fruit trees, use of agricultural
machinery, livestock population, loan and its sources, economic activities of household
members and their main source of income.
It included all public and private tractors / bulldozers / combine harvesters used wholly or
partly for agricultural purposes. Tractors / bulldozers which are nonfunctional and/or used
entirely for non-agricultural purposes were not covered in the census. The farm implements
normally pulled by or motivated with tractor and in possession of tractor owners were also
enumerated. All public and private tubewells / wells with pump / lift pumps / submersible
pumps used for irrigation purposes were also enumerated. The machines sunk only for
drinking water fell outside the scope of this census. Ascertaining the extent and pattern of use
of public and private owned farm machinery.
Moreover, the information regarding number of livestock holders possessing animals was
ascertained. Livestock count was restricted to the head count of cattle, buffaloes, sheep, goats
and camels by age, sex and breed distribution, whereas information about the horses, mules
and asses was

===== PDF PAGE 23 =====
Agricultural Census 20 24 | Integrated Digital Count
broader national framework. These deliberations focused on critical aspects such as field
deployment strategies, data-sharing protocols, and execution mechanisms. The outcome was
the development of a well-coordinated and harmonized approach, which not only aligned
provincial initiatives with national objectives but also enhanced the accuracy, credibility, and
overall coverage of the census across the country.
10.5 Meetings with District Governments
The District Level Meetings were convened nationwide in June 2024 to
comprehensively review the progress of census activities, address emerging challenges in
data collection, and formulate strategies aimed at enhancing both accuracy and efficiency.
These meetings, presided over by the Deputy Commissioners, served as vital platforms of
coordination by bringing together the district heads of key provincial departments including
agriculture, livestock, crop reporting services, education, and revenue alongside local
stakeholders. This collaborative engagement ensured that operational challenges were
addressed promptly and that district level efforts were seamlessly aligned with provincial and
national objectives. The principal objectives of these district-level meetings were as follows:
• To ensure the availability of the requisite number of enumeration and supervisory staff
for smooth field operations.
• To systematically address challenges encountered during data collection and devise
practical solutions.
• To strengthen coordination among stakeholders, thereby fostering synergy in census
implementation.
• To deliberate upon the integration of technological advancements in census activities,
with particular emphasis on digital innovation.
• To outline future steps for the successful and timely completion of the census.
• To enhance community engagement through well-structured awareness and
sensitization programs.
• To improve the training of enumerators with a focus on digital data collection methods
and modern tools.
• To provide strengthened logistical support for field teams, ensuring efficiency and
reliability in operations.
• To establish a helpdesk mechanism for prompt resolution of field-related issues.
• To conduct periodic review meetings for tracking progress and proactively addressing
emerging challenges.
The extensive stakeholder engagement process proved instrumental in the successful
planning and execution of the Agricultural Census. It not only fostered cross-sectoral
collaboration but also promoted data standardization and ensured that the adop

===== PDF PAGE 24 =====
Agricultural Census 20 24 | Integrated Digital Count
11. SAMPLING PLAN
Pakistan Bureau of Statistics successfully conducted Agricultural Census by merging
three censuses i.e. Agricultural Census, Livestock Census and Agricultural Machinery Census.
Previously, three separate censuses on Agriculture, Livestock and Machinery were conducted
on different points of time on old sample designs that were different and independent to each
other. Pakistan has vast experience of carrying out separate censuses for Agriculture (sample
based), Livestock (sample-based) and Agricultural Machinery (a mixture of complete counting
and sample based detailed interviewing).
Agricultural Census 2024 being merger of all three types of censuses conducted in one go,
under the same logistic operation. In the light of discussion between PBS technical team and
FAO International sampling expert: Sample design of Agricultural Census developed in 2021.
The sample design increase efficiency on targeting the three sub-populations of interest, crop
producers, livestock holders, and agricultural machinery owners, in a sample-based census.
11.1 Universe
The universe of the census consists of all urban and rural areas of Pakistan. Results
are representative at overall district level.
11.2 Sampling Frame
To prepare the sampling frame of the Agricultural Census (AC), the Mouza Census
2020 was conducted. Each mouza also contains Enumeration Blocks (EBs)/block; the mouza
may consist of one or more blocks. After the conduct of the latest Population & Housing
Census (P&HC) 2023, updated information is used in the framework of the Agricultural
Census. Therefore, the mapping of Mouza Census Frame 2020 and P&HC 2023 has been
carried out. The latest information on EBs against each mouza of the Mouza Census Frame
has been updated. Later, the Mouza Census Frame 2020 was mapped with the updated
sampling frame of 7th Population and Housing Census 2023 for the Agricultural Census 2024.
11.3 Sample Size Estimation
Sample size estimation has been carried out at the district level using 15% Margin of
Error at 95% confidence interval. The previous sample size of the Agricultural Census and
Livestock Census in each district has been considered along with information of cultivated
land and livestock concentration based on the Mouza Census 2020. Initially, the sample size
of a total of 11,054 mouzas/blocks was estimated; however, later, it was enhanced with the
addition of 53 mouzas/blocks/Gawala colonies, as detailed below:
Table 1: Summary of Estimated Sample Size
Sr.
Name of Province No. of Mouza No. of Blocks 

===== PDF PAGE 29 =====
Agricultural Census 20 24 | Integrated Digital Count
Table: 5: Number of Trainers trained at NIBAF, Islamabad
Department No. of Participants
Pakistan Bureau of Statistics (PBS) 320
Crop Reporting Services (CRS) 7
Agriculture Extension (AE) 13
Agriculture Research (AR) 1
Education Department (ED) 6
Information Technology (IT) 1
Livestock (LS) 1
Provincial Bureau of Statistics (BoS) 3
Total 352
B. Second Tier – Field Staff Training Sep-2024 (Phase-I), Dec-2024 (Phase-II)
Following the training of Census Master Trainers, 1st phase training of enumerators and
supervisors in September while 2nd phase training was conducted in December, 2024 at district
levels.
• Total 7686, field staff were trained by master trainers to ensure uniform understanding
and execution of census protocols.
• The training covered field data collection techniques, ethical considerations, digital tool
usage, and troubleshooting common challenges in data gathering.
• Role-playing and simulated interviews were conducted to enhance enumerators'
interaction skills with farmers.
The Agricultural Census Training served as a crucial platform for evaluating the census
progress, the accuracy and efficiency of the census process.
13.2 Field Operations
The Agricultural Census of Pakistan was conducted in two distinct phases to account
for varying climatic conditions across the country. This comprehensive national exercise was
aimed to collect up-to-date and accurate agricultural data to support policy formulation and
strategic planning for the agricultural sector.
13.3 Inaugurations
Formal launch ceremonies were held at
federal and provincial levels, marking the
nationwide rollout of census activities. The
Minister of Planning, Development and Special
Initiatives, Mr. Ahsan Iqbal, oversaw the
inauguration events and Inaugurated the Field
Operations at National Level. In Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa, the Minister of Agriculture,
Major (Retd.) Sajjad Barkwal, inaugurated the
field operations. In Balochistan, the Chief
Minister, Sarfaraz Bugti, inaugurated the event, Inauguration of field operation of 7th
while in Punjab, the Finance Minister, Mian Agricultural Census 2024 in Islamabad
28

===== PDF PAGE 30 =====
Agricultural Census 20 24 | Integrated Digital Count
Mujtaba Shujaur-Rehman, inaugurated the field operation on behalf of the Chief Minister. In
Sindh, Mr. Nasir Hussain Shah, Minister for Local Government, Forests, and Religious Affairs,
led the inauguration. Senior officials from the Pakistan Bureau of Statistics in the respective
provinces also attended the ceremonies. At District level the field operations were inaugurated
by the respective Deputy Commissioners.
The census enumeration was carried out in two phases across 160 districts of Pakistan.
Phase I was conducted from 2nd September to 31st October 2024, covering 24 districts
including selected areas of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Balochistan, Azad Jammu and Kashmir & all
districts of Gilgit Baltistan.
Phase II was conducted from 1st November to 31st December 2024, covering the remaining
136 districts, including Islamabad Capital Territory, Punjab, Sindh, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa,
Balochistan & Azad Jammu and Kashmir. In total, 160 districts were enumerated. Additionally,
nomads, gypsies, and migratory populations were listed and enumerated whenever they are
found within the boundaries of any selected Mouza or block during household listing or
enumeration.
14. ESTIMATION OF THE CENSUS RESULTS
14.1. Sample Design (Rural Part)
Agricultural Census in rural part employs a stratified multi-stage sampling design with
the following stages:
A. First Stage: Selection of Rural Mouzas
• Stratum Z1 (Mouzas without cultivated land): Simple Random Sampling (SRS)
• Stratum Z2 (Mouzas with cultivated land): Probability Proportional to Size (PPS) using
cultivated area as Measure of Size (MoS)
B. Second Stage: Selection of one block from selected big Mouzas using Multivariate PPS
(MPPS), with:
• Livestock-rearing households
• Self-agriculture households as measures of size (MOS).
C. Third Stage: Selection of households within selected Mouza/block:
• Certainty enumeration for NCH, MCH, machinery-only households, and nomads/gypsy
• Systematic Random Sampling (SRS) for:
▪ Agricultural land operator households
▪ Livestock-only households
2. Notation
Let:
• h=1,2,...,H denote rural strata
•
29
i = 1 , 2 , ... , N
h
denote Mouzas in stratum h
• b=1,2,...,B denote blocks within Mouzas i
hi
• j =1,2,...,M denote households in ith Mouza of hthstratum
hib
Study variable:
y = value of interest (land area, livestock count, machinery count)
hibj

